# 6. Ideals and Generators

## Def. Ideal Generator

Let $R$ a ring and $\subseteq R$. Then the **left ideal generated by $X$** is the smallest left ideal in $R$ which contain $X$, or equivalently intersection of all left ideals which contain $X$.

In particular, if $X = \varnothing$, then the left ideal generated by $X$ is $(0)$.

If $X = \{x\}$, then the left ideal generated by $X$ is

$$\Set{nx + rx | n \in \Z, r \in R}$$

Notice that if the ring is with identity, then the set is equal to $\Set{sx | s \in R}$. This set is denoted by $(x)_l$ called the **left ideal generated by $x$**.

## Def. Principal Ideal

A left ideal $I$ in $R$ is called a **principal left ideal** if $I=(x)_l$ for some $x \in I$.

> Definition of right principal ideal is similar which is denoted by $(x)_r$.

$(x)$ denotes the $2$-sided ideal generated by $x$.

## Def. Principal Ideal Ring

A ring $R$ is called a **principal ideal ring (P.I.R.)** if

* $R$ is commutative, and
* Every ideal of $R$ is principal.

## Def. Principal Ideal Domain

A principal ideal ring $R$ which is an integral domain is called a **principal ideal domain (P.I.D.)**.

## Def. Finitely Generated Ideal

We say an ideal $I$ in a ring $R$ is **finitely generated** if there exists a finite $X \subseteq R$ which generates $I$. Notice that in this case, every element of $I$ can be expressed as a $R$-linear combinations of $x_1,...,x_n \in X$.

## Thm. Basic Ideal Properties

Let $R$ be a ring with $1$ and $I$ a left ideal of $R$, then the following are equivalent

1. $I = R$,
2. $1 \in I$,
3. $I$ contains an unit, or in particular
4. $I$ contains an element which has a left inverse.

> By symmetry, of course, this also holds for right ideals where (4) is right inverse.
>
> For the $2$-sided ideal case (4) is left inverse OR right inverse.

### Corollary

Let $I = (x)_l$, then $I=R$ if and only if $x$ has a left inverse.

## Thm. Ideals of Division Ring

Let $R$ be a ring with $1$, then the following are equivalent

* $R$ is a division ring,
* $(0)$ and $R$ are the only left ideals in $R$,
* $(0)$ and $R$ are the only right ideals in $R$.

> Notice that if $R$ is commutative ring with $1$, then it is a field in this case.
>
> This theorem also holds if $R$ is a non-zero ring with non-trivial multiplication.

## Ideals of Matrices

Let $R$ be a ring with $1$ and $S = M_n(R)$, then if $I$ is a left (resp. right or $2$-sided) ideal in $R$, then $M_n(I)$ is a left (right or $2$-sided) ideal in $S$.

## Simple Ring

A non-zero ring $R$ is said to be a **simple ring** if only $2$-sided ideals of $R$ are $(0)$ and $R$.

> This implies that $M_n(R)$ is simple if $R$ is simple. Similarly, division rings are thefore simple.
