# Finite Reflection Groups

From now on consider $\Braket{x,y} := x \cdot y$ where $x,y \in \R^n$.

## _Def._ Reflection

> So far we should have a good idea about what a reflection is for plane. Now, we will now provide a more general definition for reflection for the Euclidian $n$-space.

Given a non-zero vector $\alpha \in \R^n$, we define the **reflection** $s_\alpha$ as a linear operator on $\R^n$ which sends $\alpha$ to $-\alpha$ while fixing hyperplane $H_\alpha$ orthogonal to $\alpha$. This is enough to define $s_\alpha$ for all values on $\R^n$. So,

$$
\begin{array}{rcl}
s_\alpha &:& \R^n \to \R^n \\
&& \alpha \mapsto -\alpha \\
&& v \mapsto v & \forall v \in \Braket{\alpha}^\bot
\end{array}
$$

One could write down this linear transformation as

$$
s_\alpha (x) = x - 2\dfrac{\Braket{x, \alpha}}{\Braket{\alpha, \alpha}} \qquad \forall x \in \R^n
$$

> Bear in mind that $s_\alpha = s_{c\alpha}$ for any non-zero scalar $c \in \R$.

## _Thm._ Basic Properties of $s_\alpha$

Let $\alpha \in \R^n$ be any non-zero vector and $c \in \R$ a non-zero scaler, then

1. $s_\alpha = s_{c\alpha}$ since $\Braket{\alpha}^\bot = \Braket{c \alpha}^\bot$,
2. $s_\alpha^2 = 1$,
3. $s_\alpha \in \bold{O}_n$ that is $s_\alpha$ is an orthogonal transformation.

## _Def._ Finite Reflection Group

A **finite reflection group** is a finite group generated by reflections. Therefore, finite reflections groups are finite subgroups of $\bold{O}_n$.

> A group generated by finitely many reflections need not to be finite group. For example, consider the single reflection with $\theta = \sqrt{2} \pi$ whose order is infite.

## _Thm._ $\bold{D}_{2n}$

Recalling that composition of two reflections is a rotation, we have the following group representation for $\bold{D}_{2n}$

$$
\bold{D}_{2n} = \Braket{s_1, s_2 \mid s_1^2 = s_2^2 = 1, (s_1s_2)^n = 1}
$$

where $s_1 s_2$ represents the smallest rotation of regular $n$-gon.

Therefore, $\bold{D}_{2n}$ is a finite reflection group.

## _Thm._ $\bold{S}_n$

More generally, the symmetric group $\bold{S}_n$ is also a finite reflection group where the transpoition $(ij)$ corresponds to the reflection $s_{e_i - e_j}$.
