# Lattices and Wallpaper Groups

> So far, by Frieze Groups, we have investigated the repeating symmetries in one dimension. Now, we will widen our scope to two dimensional case with the wallpaper groups.

## _Def._ Wallpaper Group

Let $W$ be a subgroup of $\mathbb{E}^2$ such that its translation subgroup is $\mathbb{T}_W$ generated by two independent translations (i.e. free abelian of rank $2$) and its point group is finite, then $W$ is called a **wallpaper group**.

So, $G \leq \mathbb{E}_2$ is a **wallpaper group** if it's translation subgroup is generated by two independent translations and its point group is finite.

> Such groups, especially in three dimenions, are also called **plane crystallographic group** as the lattice spanned by three independent vectors of such groups gives a configuration of points which models the internal atomic structure found in crystals.

## _Thm._ Lattice of $W$

We say the set $L$ is the **lattice** spanned by $\vec{a}, \vec{b} \in \R^2$ so that $L$ consists of all linear combinations $m\vec{a} + n\vec{b}$ where $m,n \in \Z$.

## _Thm._ Classification of Lattices in $W$

For wallpaper groups, we can classify the lattices into $5$ different types according to the shape of the basic parellogram determined by the vectors $\vec{a}$ and $\vec{b}$.

Replace $\vec{b}$ by $-\vec{b}$ if necessary to ensure that

$$
\| \vec{a} - \vec{b} \| \leq \| \vec{a} + \vec{b} \|
$$

so that, we have either

1. **Oblique** $$\| \vec{a} \| < \| \vec{b} \| < \| \vec{a} - \vec{b} \| < \| \vec{a} + \vec{b} \|$$
2. **Rectangular** $$\| \vec{a} \| < \| \vec{b} \| < \| \vec{a} - \vec{b} \| = \| \vec{a} + \vec{b} \|$$
3. **Centered Rectangular** $$\| \vec{a} \| < \| \vec{b} \| = \| \vec{a} - \vec{b} \| < \| \vec{a} + \vec{b} \|$$
4. **Square** $$\| \vec{a} \| = \| \vec{b} \| < \| \vec{a} - \vec{b} \| = \| \vec{a} + \vec{b} \|$$
5. **Hexagonal** $$\| \vec{a} \| = \| \vec{b} \| = \| \vec{a} - \vec{b} \| < \| \vec{a} + \vec{b} \|$$

> Notice that we also have the rhombus shape for
> $$\| \vec{a} \| = \| \vec{b} \| < \| \vec{a} - \vec{b} \| < \| \vec{a} + \vec{b} \|$$
> but this draws a centred rectangular for the vectors $\vec{a} - \vec{b}$ and $\vec{a} + \vec{b}$.

## _Thm._ Order of Rotations in $W$

The order of a rotation in a wallpaper group can only be $2$, $3$, $4$, or $6$.

Therefore, the point group of a wallpaper group is generated by a rotation through one of the angles $0$, $\frac{2\pi}{2}$, $\frac{2\pi}{3}$, $\frac{2\pi}{4}$, $\frac{2\pi}{6}$ and possibly a reflection.

> Every rotation in a wallpaper group $W$ has finite order because the point group is finite.

## _Thm._ Isomorphism Between Wallpaper Groups

An isomorphism between wallpaper groups takes

* translations to translations,
* rotations to rotations,
* reflections to reflections, and
* glide reflections to glide reflections.

Moreover, if two wallpaper groups are isomorphic then their point groups are also isomorphic.
