# 6. Cyclic Groups

This section contains important counting theorems (not just for cyclic or abelian groups); hence, it is important to be familiar with every proof in this exercise.

## Def. Cyclic Group

A group $H$ is called **cyclic group**, or simply **cylic**, if $H$ can be generated by a single element. That is, there exists an element $x \in H$ such that $H = \Braket{x} = \Set{x^n | n \in \Z}$. Such $x$ is called the **generator** of $H$ or $H$ is **generated by $x$**.

> Since cyclic groups are abelian (exercise), additive notation may also be used. In that case, $x^n$ becomes $nx$.
>
> Notice that the order of the element $x$ and the group $\Braket{x}$ are the same.

## Thm. Basic Cyclic Properties

Let $H$ be a cyclic group, then

* $H$ is also abelian. So, cyclic implies abelian!
* If $x$ is a generator of $H$, then so is $x^{-1}$.
* If $x$ is a generator of $H$, then $|H| = |x|$.

## Thm. Fundamental Order Property

Let $G$ be a group, $g \in G$, and $m,n \in \Z$. If $x^m = e$ and $x^n = e$, then $x^d = e$ where $d=(m,n)$.

In particular, for any $m$ such that $x^m = e$, we have $|x|$ divides $m$.

<details>
<summary><b>Proof</b></summary>
<br/>

By Eucledian Algorithm...
</details>

## Thm. Every Subgroup of $\Z$ is Also Cyclic

Noting subgroup of a cyclic is cyclic, let $(H, +) \leq (\Z, +)$. Then, either

* $H=\Braket{0}$ which is the trivial subgroup $\{0\}$, or
* $H=\Braket{m}$ where $m$ is the least positive integer in $H$. In this case, $H$ is infinite.

<details>
<summary><b>Proof</b></summary>
<br/>

Todo:
</details>

## Thm. Same Order Cyclics are Isomorphic

For any two cyclic groups $\Braket{x}$ and $\Braket{y}$, if their orders are the same, there exists an isomorphism $\varphi : \Braket{x} \to \Braket{y}$.

1. Indeed, if they are finite, then the map

    $$
    \begin{array}{cc}
        \varphi: & \Braket{x} \to \Braket{y} \\ \\
        & x^k \mapsto y^k
    \end{array}
    $$

    is well-defined and an isomorphism. Therefore, any finite cyclic group of order $n$ is isomorphic to the cyclic group $(\Z_n, +_Z)$.

2. If they are infinite, then the map

    $$
    \begin{array}{cc}
        \varphi: & \Z \to \Braket{x} \\ \\
        & k \mapsto x^k
    \end{array}
    $$

    is well-defined and an isomorphism. Therefore, any infinite cyclic group is isomorphic to $(\Z, +_\Z)$.

<details>
<summary><b>Proof</b></summary>
<br/>

Todo:
</details>

## Thm. Fundamentals of Element Orders

Let $G$ be any group, $x \in G$ and $a \in \Z^*$, then

1. If $|x| = \infty$, then $|x^a|=\infty$.
2. If $|x| = n$, then $|x^a| = \dfrac{n}{(n, a)}$.

## Thm. Orders of Commutative Elements

Let $G$ be a group and $a$ and $b$ elements of $G$ whose orders are respectively $m$ and $n$. If $a$ and $b$ commute, then

1. $(m,n) = 1 \implies |ab| = |a| \> |b|$,
2. There exists $g \in G$ such that $|g| = \text{lcm}(m,n)$.

<details>
<summary><b>Proof</b></summary>
<br/>

> TODO:
</details>

## Thm. Commutative Elements

## Thm. On Generators of Cyclics

Let $H = \Braket{x}$, then

1. If $H$ is infinite, then $x$ and $x^{-1}$ are the only generators of $H$.
2. If $H$ is finite of order $n$, then $x^k$ is a generator of $H$, if and only if $(k,n)=1$.

> Therefore, the number of generators of $H$ equals to $\varphi(n)$ where $\varphi$ is Euler's $\phi$-function.

## Thm. Basic Cyclic Properties

Let $H=\Braket{x}$ be cyclic, then

1. Every subgroup of $H$ is also cyclic.
2. If $H$ is infinite, then for any distinct non-negative integers $a$ and $b$, $\Braket{x^a} \neq \Braket{x^b}$.
3. For every integer $m$ we have $\Braket{x^m} = \Braket{x^{-m}}$. Therefore, evey non-trivial subgroup of $H$...

## Def. Locally Cyclic

A group $G$ is said to be **locally cyclic** if every finitely generated subgroup is cyclic.

## Thm. Locally Cyclic Properties

1. Every cyclic group is locally cyclic.
2. Every finetely-generated locally cyclic group is cyclic.
3. Every subgroup (and quotient group) of a locally cyclic group is locally cyclic.
4. Every homomorphic image of a locally cyclic group is locally cylic.
5. A group is locally cyclic if and only if every pair of elements in the group generates  a cyclic group.
6. A group is locally cyclic if and only if its lattice of subgroups is distributive.

<!-- TODO: Revise, relocate, see: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Locally_cyclic_group -->

<!-- ## Thm. Homomorphic Image of Cyclic is Cyclic

<!-- TODO: Revise below -->

Let $\varphi: G \to H$ be a group homomorphism, $G$ cyclic, and $a \in G$. Then, $\Braket{\varphi(a)}$ is also cyclic. In particular, $\varphi(G)$ is cyclic.

<details>
<summary><b>Proof</b></summary>
<br/>

Exercise.
</details> -->

## Thm. Finite Subgroups Imply Finite Group

Any group which has only finitely many subgroups must also be finite.

<details>
<summary><b>Proof</b></summary>
<br/>

Consider the finite set of cyclics $\mathcal{C} = \Set{\Braket{x} | x \in G} = \Set{ \Braket{x_1}, \Braket{x_2}, ..., \Braket{x_n}}$, rest is easy to show.
</details>
