# 15. Free Groups

> From a constructive approach...

## Def. Free Generator

We say $S$ is a **free generator** if for each $s \in S$ there exists a corresponding distinct $s^{-1} \in S^{-1}$ called the **inverse** of $s$ such that $S$ and $S^{-1}$ are disjoint and $|S| = |S^{-1}|$. Moreover, the **identity** $\epsilon$ of $S$ is an element such that $\epsilon \not\in S \cup S^{-1}$ whose inverse is itself.

> We could have defined the free generator $S$ more formally with tuples and bijective functions, but the notation becomes very cumbersome very quickly. Intuition and the way to formalize it should be clear.

<!-- The tuple $S=(X, X^{-1}, \rho, \epsilon)$ is called a **free generator** if

1. $X \cap X^{-1} \cap \{\epsilon\} = \varnothing$,
2. $\rho: X \to X^{-1}$ is a bijection.

Moreover,

1. $\epsilon$ is called the **identity** of $S$,
2. the **inverse** of $x \in X$ is denoted by $x^{-1}$ and equals to $\rho(x)$. Similarly, the inverse of $x^{-1} \in X^{-1}$ is $x = \rho^{-1}(x^{-1})$.
3. The **inverse** of $\epsilon$ is again $\epsilon$. -->

## Def. Word

Let $S$ be a **free generator**, then a **word** on $S$ is a countably finite sequence $(a_1, a_2, ...)$, indexed by $\N^+$, where

* $a_i \in S \cup S^{-1} \cup \{\epsilon\}$ for each $i \in \N^+$, and
* for some $n \in \N^+$ we have $a_k = \epsilon$ for all $k \geq n$.

The least integer $n$ such that $a_i = \epsilon$ for all $k \geq n$ is called the **rank** of the word.

The constant sequence $(\epsilon, \epsilon, ...)$ is called the **empty word** and denoted with $1$.

A word $w = (a_1, a_2, ...)$ is said to be **reduced** if

1. $a_i = x \implies a_{i+1} \neq x^{-1}$ for all $i \in \N^+$ and $x \in S \cup S^{-1}$, that is there are no adjacent inverses (other than $\epsilon$),
2. $a_k = \epsilon \implies a_i = \epsilon$ for all $i \geq k$, that is any identity is followed by an identity.

In particular, every non-empty reduced word is of the form, for some $n \in \N^+$

$$
(x_1^{\lambda_1}, x_2^{\lambda_2}, ..., x_n^{\lambda_n}, \epsilon, \epsilon, ...)
$$

where $x_i \in X$ and $\lambda_i = \pm 1$. From now on we will omit the parentheses.

> Notice that the empty word is reduced and $x^1 := x$. Reduction algorithm should be obvious.
>
> This is a rather formal definition of a word, simply put a word on $X$ is a finite product of elements $X \cup X^{-1}$ such that inverses cancel each other out where $\epsilon$ is the identity. Now, we should define the binary multiplication on (reduced) words themselves to make it a group.

## Def. Free Group

Let non-empty $X$ be a free generator, and let $\mathbf{F}(X)$ be the **set of all reduced words** on $X$, then $\mathbf{F}(X)$ is a group under the binary operation where $xy$ is the _reduced concatenation_ for all $x,y \in \mathbf{F}(X)$. The group $\mathbf{F}(X)$ is called the **free group on the set $X$** denoted by $\Braket{X}$.

> For a more formal definition check out Hungerford pp. 64-65
>
> Do not mistake $\Braket{\cdot}$ here with the notation of cyclic groups or generators.

## Thm. Universal Property

Let $F = \Braket{X}$ and $i: X \to F$ an inclusion map. For $G$ a group and $\varphi: X \to G$ a map of sets (a map without any extra structure), there exists an unique homomorphism of groups $\bar{\varphi}: F \to G$ such that $\bar{\varphi} \circ i = \varphi$.

<!-- In other words, F is a free object on the set X in the category of groups. -->

<!-- TODO: Diagram -->

<details>
<summary><b>Proof</b></summary>
<br/>

> TODO:
</details>

### Corollary

Every group $G$ is the homomorphic image of a free group $F$. In particular, $G$ is isomorphic to the quotient group $F/{\text{Ker }\bar{\varphi}}$.

## Def. Presentation

Let $Y \subseteq \Braket{X}$, then a group $G$ is said to be **defined** by the **generators** $x \in X$ and **relations** $w \in Y$ provided that $N \trianglelefteq \Braket{X}$ is generated by $Y$. Noting that $G \cong \Braket{X}/N$, we say $\Braket{X | Y}$ is a **presentation** of $G$.

Moreover, instead of $\Braket{X|Y}$, we may write $\Braket{X|w_1=1, w_2 = 1, ...}$ for brevity, or even more compactly $\Braket{X|w_1, w_2, ...}$

> We have previously shown such defined group exists and it is the largest possible group in that sense.

### Example

$\Braket{a,b | a^n = 1 (n \geq 3), b^2 = 1, abab = 1}$ is a presentation for the dihedral group $D_n$.

## Thm. Van Dyck

Let $G = \Braket{X|Y}$ and $H = \Braket{X}$ such that $H$ satisfies all the relations $w = 1$ where $w \in Y$, then there is an epimorphism $\psi: G \to H$.

<details>
<summary><b>Proof</b></summary>
<br/>

> TODO:
</details>

## Def. Free Product

> TODO

## Exercises

### Exercise 1

Every non-identity element in a free group $F$ has infinite order.

### Exercise 2

Show that $\Braket{a} \cong \Z$ where $\Braket{a}$ is the free group generated by $\{a\}$.

<!-- ### Exercise 4

A free group is a free product of infinite cyclic groups. -->
