# Free Abelian Groups

> In this section we will use additive notation rather than our usual multiplicative notation.

## Def. Basis

Noting that the subgroup $\Braket{X}$ generated by $X$ in additive notation consists of all **linear combinations**

$$
n_1x_1 + n_2x_2+ \cdots + n_kx_k
$$

where $n_i \in \Z$ and $x_i \in X$.

A **basis** of an abelian group $F$ is a subset $X$ of $F$ such that

* $F = \Braket{X}$, and
* for distinct $x_1, ..., x_n \in X$ and $n_i \in \Z$ we have $$n_1x_1 + \cdots + n_kx_k = 0 \implies n_i = 0 \quad \forall i$$

## Def. Free Abelian Group

Let $F$ be an abelian group, then it is called a **free abelian group** if it has an non-empty basis (or equivalently any one of the conditions below).

_By definition_, the trivial group $\Braket{0}$ is the free abelian group on the null set $\varnothing$.

## Thm. Equivalent Basis Conditions

Let $F$ be an abelian group, then the following are equivalent

1. $F$ has a non-empty basis,
2. $F$ is the (internal) direct sum of a family of infinite cyclic subgroups,
3. $F$ is (isomorphic to) a direct sum of copies of $(\Z, +)$,
<!-- 4. $F$ is a free object in the category of abelian groups. -->

<details>
<summary><b>Proof</b></summary>
<br/>

> TODO:
</details>

## Thm. Basis Cardinality

Any two bases of a free abelian group $F$ have the same cardinality called the **rank** of $F$.

<details>
<summary><b>Proof</b></summary>
<br/>

> TODO:
</details>

## Thm. Free Abelian Subgroups

Every subgroup of a free abelian group including the $\Braket{0}$ is also free abelian.

## Thm. Isomorphism on Free Abelian Groups

Two free abelian groups are isomorphic if and only if they have the same rank.

<details>
<summary><b>Proof</b></summary>
<br/>

> TODO:
</details>

## Thm. Free Abelian Groups and Abelian Groups

Every abelian group $G$ is the homomorphic image of a free abelian group of rank $|X|$ where $X$ is a set of generators of $G$.

<details>
<summary><b>Proof</b></summary>
<br/>

> TODO:
</details>

## Thm. Basis for Subgroups

Let $F$ be a free abelian group of finite rank $n$ with the basis $\Set{x_1, ..., x_n}$ and $G$ its non-zero subgroup, then there exists an integer $r \leq n$ and positive integers $d_1,...,d_r$ such that $d_1\>|\>d_2\>|\>\cdots\>|\>d_r$ where $G$ is free abelian with the basis $\Set{d_1x_1, ..., d_rx_r}$.

<details>
<summary><b>Proof</b></summary>
<br/>

> TODO:
</details>

### Corollary. Rank of Subgroups

Let $G$ be an finitely generated abelian group generated by $n$ elements, then every subgroup $H$ of $G$ is generated by $m$ elements where $m \leq n$.

> This corollary is false if abelian is omitted.

<!-- TODO: Add example -->

## Def. General Abelian Basis

> We have defined basis above for _free_ abelian groups which doesn't really make sense for any abelian group, therefore...

Let $G$ be an abelian group. We say a finite set of elements $g_1,..., g_k \in G$ is **linearly dependent** (over $\Z$) if there exists $n_1, ..., n_k \in \Z$ not all zero such that

$$
\sum_{i = 1}^k n_i g_i = 0
$$

Moreover, an arbitrary family of elements of $G$ is said the be **linearly dependent** if some finite subfamily is linearly dependent.

For any abelian group $A$, not necessarily torsion-free, which contain at least one element of infinite order there is always a maximal linearly independent subset. Moreover, all such maximal subsets have the same cardinality $\kappa$. In this case, we say $A$ is of **rank** $\kappa$.

> Since periodic (every element has finite order) abelian groups do not contain any linearly independent subset we define their ranks to be $0$.

## Thm. A Rank $1$ Abelian Group

A nonzero torsion-free abelian group has rank $1$ if and only if it is isomorphic to a subgroup of $(\mathbb{Q}, +)$.
