# Modules

## Def. Module

Let $R$ be a ring. A (left) **$R$-module** is an additive abelian group $A$ together with the multiplication $R \times A \to A$ that satisfies

1. $r(sa) = (rs)a$
2. $r(a+b) = ra + rb$
3. $(r+s)a = ra + sa$

for all $r,s \in R$ and $a,b \in A$. Moreover, if $R$ is with identity $1_R$, then $A$ is said to be an **unitary $R$-module** if

4. $1_R a = a$

for all $a \in A$.

> A right module is defined as expected.

<!-- division ring -> vector space -->

The module with multiplication $ra \mapsto 0$ is called the **trivial module structure**.

## Thm. Basic Module Properties

Let $A$ be a $R$-module, then

1. $(-r)a = -(ra) = r(-a)$,and
2. $n(ra) = r(na)$

for all $r \in R$, $n \in \Z$ and $a \in A$.

## Def. Module Homomorphism

Let $A$ and $B$ be $R$-modules. A function $\varphi$ is called **$R$-module homomorphism** if

1. $\varphi(a+b) = \varphi(a) + \varphi(b)$, and
2. $\varphi(ra) = r\varphi(a)$

for all $a \in A$, $b \in B$, and $r \in R$.

> Monomorphism, Epimorphism, Isomorphism, etc. are all defined as expected and the **kernel** is simply set kernel of the group homomorphism.

## Def. Submodule

Let $A$ be a $R$-module and $B \subseteq A$. We say $B$ is a **submodule** if $B \leq A$ and $RB \subseteq B$.

## Thm. Basic Submodule Properties

Let $A$ be a $R$-module.

1. Submodule of an unitary module over a ring with identity is necessarily unitary.

## Def. Generator

Let $A$ be a $R$-module and $X \subseteq A$. The intersection of all submodules of $A$ that contain $X$ is called the **submodule generated by $X$**.

## Def. Vector Space

Let $A$ be a $R$-module. We say $A$ is a **vector space** if $R$ is a division ring. Moreover, in this case, other definitions become

$$
\small
\def\arraystretch{1.25}
\begin{array}{lll}
\textbf{Submodule} &:& \text{Subspace} \\
\textbf{Homomorphism} &:& \text{Linear Transformation} \\
\textbf{Generated by} &:& \text{Spanned by} \\
\end{array}
$$

## Thm. Quotient Module

Let $A$ a $R$-module and $B$ its submodule, then the **quotient** subgroup $A/B$ is an $R$-module with the action of $R$ on $A/B$

$$
r(a + B) = ra + B
$$

for all $r \in R$ and $a \in A$. Moreover, the map $\pi: A \to A/B$ defined as $a \mapsto a + B$ is an $R$-module homomorphism called the **projection** (or **cannonical epimorphism**).

Isomorphism theorems and many more results on group theory is, _mutatis mutandis_, also applicable to modules.
